---
title: Writing Custom Control Surfaces for Ableton
author: yan
date: 2019-11-07
url: /ableton-midi/

---

Recently I've been really interested in what goes on in Ableton Live under the hood,
since it's a widely-used piece of proprietary software for making bangers.
It turns out you can get pretty far knowing just a small amount of Python
scripting!

For instance, I found that .als files (and .adv's, and .adg's, and probably
more) are just gzipped XML and so therefore you can do some fun processing on
them using any XML library, such as Python's. So, remembering the week that it
took me to convert all my Ableton DJ sets into Rekordbox, I wrote a script to
automatically [convert Ableton cues to Rekordbox and
vice-versa](https://github.com/diracdeltas/rekordbox-scripts/blob/master/ableton-to-cues.py). This could have definitely saved me about 10 hours of boring work time that could have been spent making bangers instead!

This week, I started looking into Ableton's Python interface for control
surfaces and you'll never guess what happened next (a bunch of boring stuff).

## What's a control surface?

[According to Ableton](https://help.ableton.com/hc/en-us/articles/209774285-Using-Control-Surfaces), "Control Surfaces are specially written scripts which allow controllers to interface with Live".

Most people who use Ableton interact with it through a tactile controller, such as
a MIDI keyboard or an Ableton Push or the APC40 controller. Control surfaces
are scripts which act as a bridge between Ableton and the controller, telling
Ableton what each button/knob/fader/etc. on the controller should do.

It turns out that these control surfaces are simply Python scripts.

## Where does Ableton store its control surface scripts?

Ableton comes with a bunch of control surface scripts pre-installed for common
controllers such as the Launchkey, Push, and APCs. For these controllers, you can just plug
in the controller, open Ableton Preferences, and select the control surface for
it via a drop-down list in the Link/MIDI tab.

These scripts are stored in `/Applications/Ableton Live
$VERSION.app/Contents/App Resources/MIDI Remote Scripts/` on Mac (where
`$VERSION` is `10 Suite` for instance if you have Live 10 Suite installed) and
`\ProgramData\Ableton\Live x.x\Resources\MIDI Remote Scripts\` on Windows.

For the rest of this post we will refer to this as the MIDI Remote Scripts
directory.

## Loading a custom control surface script

If you want to load your own custom control surface script for an existing
MIDI controller, the steps are fairly straightforward:

1. Find the existing control surface for the MIDI controller in the MIDI Remote
   Scripts directory. For instance, for the APC40, this would be in `APC40/` as
   a bunch of .pyc files. You can either decompile the .pyc yourself or find
   the decompiled version in
   https://github.com/gluon/AbletonLive10.1_MIDIRemoteScripts.
2. Copy these decompiled Python files to a new directory in the MIDI Remote
   Scripts directory.
3. Customize them (more on this in the next section).
4. Now open Ableton and go to the Link/MIDI tab of Preferences. Ableton should
   automatically compile the .py files to .pyc. If everything loaded without
   errors, you will see your new MIDI Remote Scripts directory show up as
   an option in the Control Surface dropdown.

## Customizing control surfaces

In the MIDI Remote Scripts directory, there's various directories that start
with `_`. These are libraries which other control surfaces can make use of. One
particularly useful one is `_Framework`, which includes definitions for useful
classes like `ButtonElement`, which represents a button on the controller.

The best intro I've found to `_Framework` is this one by Hanz Petrov:
https://livecontrol.q3f.org/ableton-liveapi/articles/introduction-to-the-framework-classes/.

Let's say we want to take the Metronome button on an APC40MKII and instead map
that to turn on looping for the currently active clip. Assume we've already
created a `ControlSurface` subclass as a starting point.

1. As a shortcut to calling `ButtonElement` directly, note that there is an
   `_APC` library already which provides a `make_button` utility method for APC
   controllers. [Github link
   here.](https://github.com/gluon/AbletonLive10.1_MIDIRemoteScripts/blob/master/_APC/ControlElementUtils.py#L16)
2. `make_button` takes an identifier as input. To figure out what we
   need to pass here for the metronome button, we can look at the APC control
   protocol
   [documentation](https://6be54c364949b623a3c0-4409a68c214f3a9eeca8d0265e9266c0.ssl.cf2.rackcdn.com/989/documents/APC40Mk2_Communications_Protocol_v1.2.pdf) which conveniently lists identifiers for all the buttons on the APC40MKII. We see that 0x5a, or 90, is the identifier for the metronome button.
3. Now we have to add a listener to the button using the `add_value_listener` method of `ButtonElement` that
   triggers when the button is pressed. Let's call this handler `start_loop`.
4. In `start_loop`, we can call the `song()`
   [method](https://github.com/gluon/AbletonLive10.1_MIDIRemoteScripts/blob/master/_Framework/ControlSurface.py#L126) of the ControlSurface
   superclass in order to get a reference to the Live.Song.Song object that we are
   currently controlling. For documentation on this and other Live
   objects that are available in Python, see [here](https://julienbayle.studio/PythonLiveAPI_documentation/Live10.1.xml).
5. `song().view.highlighted_clip_slot.clip` now gives us the active clip. This
   is a Live.Clip.Clip object according to the docs above. So we can simply set
   `clip.looping` to a truthy value like 1 to make the clip loop!

In reality, I've found the best way to figure these things out is to simply
copy/paste code from other control surface scripts as needed. In particular,
Will Marshall's [unsupported Ableton 8 control surface
scripts](ihttps://github.com/willrjmarshall/AbletonDJTemplateUnsupported) are
really helpful.

## Debugging tips

1. You can log to Ableton's main log file using the ControlSurface
   `log_message` method defined
   [here](https://github.com/gluon/AbletonLive10.1_MIDIRemoteScripts/blob/master/_Framework/ControlSurface.py#L250).
   On Mac, the log file is at
   `/Users/[username]/Library/Preferences/Ableton/Live x.x.x/Log.txt` and on
   Windows it's `\Users\[username]\AppData\Roaming\Ableton\Live
   x.x.x\Preferences\Log.txt`. This file also contains errors emitted by
   Python.
2. You can also reload the MIDI control surface without restarting Ableton
   - simply re-open the currently open session from `File > Open Recent Set`.
3. If you find that Ableton doesn't auto-compile Python, you can compile using
   `python -m compileall .`
4. As mentioned previously, if a script throws an error immediately, it won't
   show up in Ableton's list of available control surfaces.

## Example

As an example, see this [Youtube
video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YILKOWhN2ag) and [Github
repo](https://github.com/diracdeltas/apc40mk2) for adding CDJ-style looping
buttons to the APC40MK2. The work for this was done originally for Ableton 8 by
Will Marshall and I only made some minor edits to make it more CDJ-like and
loadable in Live 10.

Note that you can accomplish much of this already without control surface
scripts simply by
using Ableton's MIDI mapping mode. One exception is the ability to halve and
double loop lengths.

I hope this helps to show that control surface scripts are a quite powerful and
flexible way to get your Ableton controller to behave exactly the way you want.
Happy hacking!
